EXECUTIVE DIGEST
From startup to scalable enterprise: Laying
the foundation
Joseph C. Picken
Naveen Jindal School of Management, The University of Texas at Dallas, 800 West Campbell Road SM 43,
Richardson, TX 75080-3021, U.S.A.
1. Laying the foundation: The critical
period of transition
In recent years, the lean startup methodology has
been popularized as the scientific method applied
to startups. This approach emphasizes a disciplined
process of exploration, validation, and refinement
of the business concept as an essential first step in
the development of an entrepreneurial venture
(Aulet, 2013; Blank, 2013). Although undeniably
important, refining and validating the business concept is only a first step. Much work remains to be
done as the entrepreneur and his/her team lay the
foundation for a scalable enterprise.
Various models have described the chronological
evolution of entrepreneurial firms. Most follow the
classic life cycle model of organizational growth:
Steinmetz (1969) and Kroeger (1974) focused on
evolving managerial functions and roles at different
stages; Greiner (1972) described periods of growth
and evolution punctuated by crises of leadership,
autonomy, control, and bureaucracy, each setting
the stage for the next period of growth.
Business Horizons (2017) 60, 587—595
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
www.elsevier.com/locate/bushor
KEYWORDS
Entrepreneurship;
Startup;
Laying the foundation;
Scaling;
Company building;
Sustained and
profitable growth
Abstract The essential steps in the transition from a nascent startup to an
organization capable of sustained and profitable growth are not readily apparent
to many early stage entrepreneurs. The life cycle of an entrepreneurial venture
consists of four stages (startup, transition, scaling, and exit), each defined by the
principal challenges faced by the founding team. The popular lean startup methodology emphasizes a disciplined process of exploration, validation, and refinement of
the business concept as the essential first step in the process. Although it is
undeniably important to get the business concept right in the beginning, there is
a period of transition during which the founding team must establish a solid
foundation for growth and scaling that may ultimately have a greater influence
on venture success. To date, limited research has focused on transition and the field
has offered little normative guidance. Entrepreneurs have largely been on their own
as they struggle, through trial and error, to lay the foundation and build a scalable
business. This article describes the essential tasks to be undertaken–—the eight
hurdles oftransition–—and provides normative guidance, solidly based on experience,
regarding the actions required to establish the foundation for a scalable business.
# 2017 Kelley School of Business, Indiana University. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.
E-mail address: jpicken@utdallas.edu
0007-6813/$ — see front matter # 2017 Kelley School of Business, Indiana University. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2017.05.002
In our view1
, the entrepreneurial innovation process proceeds through four stages (startup, transition, scaling, and exit), each defined by the principal
challenges faced by the founding team. As illustrated in Figure 1, the boundaries between the adjacent
stages are fuzzy and frequently overlapping. While it
is essential to get the business concept right in the
startup stage, laying the foundation for a scalable
enterprise during the period of transition is equally
critical and may ultimately have a greater influence
on venture success than startup.
The entrepreneur’s challenge in startup is to
define and validate the business concept: the market opportunity (i.e., critical need, target market,
market size, and timing); the offering (i.e., product
or service and value proposition); the business
model (i.e., resources, processes, and economic
model); and the go-to-market strategy needed to
deliver the offering reliably to the target customer
at a profit. In startup, the focus is narrow, the
commitment of time and resources is limited, and
the economic risks are modest. The organization of
a startup is typically informal, loosely structured,
and fluid.
The period of transition begins about the time an
entrepreneurial firm first gains traction in the marketplace. Transition represents an essential bridge
between the loosely structured informality of the
startup and the structured and disciplined form
required for rapid scaling. The entrepreneur’s challenge is to complete the development of the offering, establish a solid foundation, and position the
organization for rapid scaling. Once the startup
engages customers, additional resources are required, new capabilities must be developed, and
the scope and complexity of the challenges faced by
the founding team increase dramatically (Hambrick
& Crozier, 1985).
In the scaling phase, the entrepreneur must add
significant resources and leverage processes and
partnerships to grow the business within the framework of the validated business concept and a sustainable business model. The objective becomes
rapid growth in order to achieve competitive scale
and establish sustainable market leadership. Scaling requires a very different kind of organization–—
one with structure, process, and discipline. As the
firm grows, the fluid and flexible environment of the
startup organization becomes unwieldy. Informal
communication and decision-making processes are
no longer effective. Functional specialists now assume roles once covered by generalists, and processes and policies replace ad hoc decision making
(Hofer & Charan, 1984). Consistent profitability is
required to provide a return for investors and fund
the drive to market leadership. At some point, a
successful exit (by IPO, private sale, merger, or
acquisition) is usually required to harvest the value
accumulated by the venture for the benefit of the
entrepreneur and investors.
Transition, as the nascent startup matures into a
disciplined business, is arguably the most critical
period in the life of an emerging firm. During this
relatively brief period (typically 18—36 months),
the founding team must lay the foundation for a
rapidly growing business, establish credibility and
legitimacy, and acquire the initial resources essential for growth. The experience and competence
demanded of the management team expands dramatically in this stage (Wasserman, 2003). The
founders must simultaneously deal with strategic
direction and market positioning, building a management team, implementing discipline, structure
and management processes, acquiring resources,
molding a supportive culture, and managing risk
proactively. The increased scope and complexity
also requires that the founding team adjust
its leadership style and management behaviors
(Picken, 2017).
Many new ventures fail to negotiate these challenges. No matter how brilliant or compelling the
original idea, only about half survive more than
5 years (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2016), and only
the most promising receive early-stage professional
investment. Even with substantial funding, more
than 75% of venture-backed firms fail or sustain a
marginal existence (Ruhnka, Feldman, & Dean,
1992). Management inexperience or incompetence
(Gorman & Sahlman, 1989), the failure to manage
Figure 1. Four stages in the life cycle of an entrepreneurial firm
TIME
SALES
Transition
(lay the foundation for
a scalable business)
Scaling (add resources to profitably scale the Startup enterprise) (define and validate
the business concept)
Exit (harvest the venture through IPO, private sale, merger or acquisition)
1 The model of organizational development reflects the collaborative contribution of the entrepreneurship faculty at the
Jindal School.
588 EXECUTIVE DIGEST
the business properly (Drucker, 1985), or the inability of the founders to continually meet new challenges as the business evolves (Boeker & Wiltbank,
2005) are often cited as factors contributing to
venture failure. Premature scaling, in a bid to
establish market leadership before laying a solid
foundation for rapid growth, often precipitates
failure as transaction volumes overwhelm inadequate systems and infrastructures or outrun
the capacity of the management team (Boeker &
Karichalil, 2002). If a proper foundation for scaling
has been established, the firm will be positioned to
grow rapidly, riding the momentum of an expanding
market as far and as fast as is competitively achievable. If not, trouble lies ahead.
So, what must founders do to ensure success? The
essential steps in the transition from a nascent
startup to an organization capable of sustained
and profitable growth are known but are not apparent to most early stage entrepreneurs, who typically are concerned primarily with product and
early customer development. To date, there has
been limited focus on this critical period and little
has been offered in the form of useful normative
guidance. Entrepreneurs have been left largely on
their own to struggle, through trial and error, as
they attempt to establish the structure and foundation for a scalable business. My objective in this
Executive Digest is to outline the essential tasks and
challenges of transition and to provide guidance,
based on experience, about the actions required.
I summarize the essential tasks in Table 1 as the
eight hurdles of transition (previously introduced in
Business Horizons by Picken, 2017). The examples
provided herein have been disguised to protect
client confidentiality.
2. The eight hurdles of transition
In an Olympic track and field event, a field of
competitors must run a race on a 110-meter track
interrupted by eight hurdles that must be cleared
along the way. The winner is the first to cross the
finish line; tripping over any of the hurdles significantly reduces the odds of ending up on the podium.
The entrepreneurial startup is also in a race.
Significant advantages usually accrue for companies
Table 1. The eight hurdles of the transition period
 Setting a direction and maintaining focus
The entrepreneur must be clear about his/her goals, view the situation realistically, and establish and
communicate a clear direction (target customer, offering, value proposition, business model and key milestones)
to keep the organization focused on the proper objectives.
 Positioning products/services in an expanded market
Customerrelationships and distribution channels must be developed and the product/service offering expanded,
refined, and repositioned to meet the needs of an expanded market.
 Maintaining customer/market responsiveness
In the early days, when customer issues and problems arise, decisions are made quickly and resolution is swift.
With growth, functional specialization and organizational layers slow the process, and new internal processes
must be developed and implemented to maintain customer responsiveness.
 Building an organization and management team
The development ofthe managementteam is critical. The required skills and the organizational demands change
significantly as the firm grows, requiring careful planning and flexibility to ensure alignment with strategy and
business requirements.
 Developing effective processes and infrastructures
Effective decision processes and efficient operational and management processes and infrastructures are
essential to support growth. As the firm gains traction in the marketplace, new systems and infrastructures will
be required to deliver value to customers, adapt to a changing environment and support the growing business.
 Building financial capability
It’s not just about raising money. Investors are also interested in the efficient utilization of resources, effective
controls, efficient management of working capital, reliable financial projections, and clear and effective
stakeholder communications.
 Developing an appropriate culture
Founders have an opportunity to shape and mold a culture that reflects values, beliefs and norms supportive of
the firm’s business purpose and strategy. Failure to do so risks the unwitting development of a dysfunctional
culture that precipitates the failure of the firm.
 Managing risks and vulnerabilities
Rapidly growing ventures with all their eggs in one basket are particularly vulnerable to sources of risk, including
rapid growth, a narrow revenue base, inexperienced employees, key employee defections, inadequate
infrastructures, information and management systems, and a bias toward entrepreneurial risk-taking.
EXECUTIVE DIGEST 589
that lead their markets. During periods of rapid
growth and expansion, demand typically exceeds
supply, margins are higher, competition is less, and
the market leader earns higher profits. The perceived market leader becomes the preferred
choice, sets market prices, and often realizes economies of scope and scale in marketing, production,
and distribution (Moore, 1991).
So why do so many startups stumble and fall? One
can often trace a venture’s failure to realize its
early promise to the failure to clear one or more of
the hurdles during the critical period of transition.
2.1. The first hurdle: Setting a direction
and maintaining focus
There is an old saying: ‘If you don’t know where
you’re headed, any road will get you there.’ For the
entrepreneurial firm with limited resources, ‘any
road’ is rarely good enough. Founders who begin to
develop products, build the business, hire employees, and acquire resources before they understand
their customers and validate their key assumptions,
frequently trip over this hurdle.
The principal challenge in startup is to define and
validate the business concept in the context of
market realities, addressing both value creation
for the target customer and value capture for the
entrepreneur and investors. The firm and its customers do not exist in isolation but must recognize
and deal with the complexities of an industry
ecosystem, consisting of all the firms and their
partners in addition to suppliers, customers, and
competitors that comprise the infrastructure of
a dynamic and continually evolving competitive
environment.
The essential elements of value creation–—the
target customer, his needs and preferences, and
an offering and value proposition that will satisfy
those needs–—must be developed and validated.
The entrepreneur must identify and evaluate both
competitors and potential competitors. A business
model capable of reliably and profitably delivering
the value proposition must specify: the customer
relationships and channels for sales; distribution
and after-market support; the economic model
and profit formula; and the activities, processes,
and partnerships required for implementation
(Johnson, Christensen, & Kagermann, 2008).
A clear market entry strategy is essential, as
entering an established market against incumbent
competitors requires a very different strategy and
approach than competing against non-consumption
in a virgin territory. The entrepreneur must understand the context, view the situation realistically,
be clear about goals and strategic priorities, and
identify the most direct and efficient path to the
objective. This requires a clear sense of what the
firm is about, what it will do, and–—perhaps more
important–—what it must not do.
Strategy and direction must be communicated
broadly and effectively. Because the entrepreneur
has an intuitive sense of direction, he/she often
assumes that the rest of the team and key partners
share that understanding. If the founder fails to
clearly communicate and achieve alignment on
direction, the outcome is often sub-optimization
and wasted resources as other members of the team
must guess at what makes strategic sense.
All too often, founders forge ahead prematurely
into product development and company building,
wasting time and limited resources. Many an entrepreneur without a steady focus and clear sense of
direction has dissipated scarce resources by chasing
targets of opportunity not on the organization’s
critical path.
A promising new medical device technology had
the potential to disrupt an established industry
focused on neurostimulation for pain management. The new technology replaced electrodes
surgically implanted at the base of the spine
and connected to a battery placed under the skin
with miniaturized subdermal electric nodes placed
immediately adjacent to the affected peripheral
nerves. A PhD student working on the device
licensed the technology, formed a startup, and
funded early concept and application development
through federal research grants. When technical
challenges arose, the founder followed the path of
least resistance, abandoned the initial concept
and applied for new grants for any potential application for which funding was available. After
another failure, another research grant, and another shift in strategy, the founder departed. The
company has never successfully brought a product
to market. The remaining employees have become
competent grant writers, however, and continue
to pursue new funding opportunities one after
another.
A clear sense of direction and disciplined execution are essential. If the entrepreneur and the
founding team do not understand the competitive
environment and do not have a clear sense of how
the venture will engage customers, create value,
and consistently deliver that value at a profit, it is
likely that ‘any road will do.’
2.2. The second hurdle: Positioning
products/services in an expanded market
Although understanding and satisfying the needs of
a firm’s initial customers is essential to early market
590 EXECUTIVE DIGEST
entry (Aulet, 2013), many entrepreneurs fail to
recognize the ongoing dynamics of this relationship.
The expectations and demands of customers in the
early market are very different from those in mainstream markets. As a startup penetrates a market,
expands its geographic scope, and moves beyond
early adopters into mainstream markets, the company must adjust and reposition its product/service
offering again and again to meet the needs of an
expanded market (Moore, 1991).
Many startups are focused on a device or a core
product rather than a complete, whole-product
offering. Delivering a complete offering often requires complementary products (such as software
for a computer) and contributions from marketing,
sales, distribution, field engineering, service, training, customer support, financing, warranty administration, etc. (Schindehutte, Morris, & Pitt, 2009).
Early adopters may buy the core product but the
mainstream is interested in offerings that meet a
broader set of requirements.
There are four fundamental questions that must
be addressed: Who is our customer? What are his/
her needs? What are his/her priorities? How will we
sell, deliver, service, and support our products?
These questions must be revisited repeatedly as
the firm engages progressively broader markets.
As the firm transitions from early markets into
the mainstream, the relative importance of the
product itself declines while the emphasis on ancillary products, services, and support grows.
Recognizing and responding to a continuously
evolving set of customer needs and requirements
is essential. Sales, marketing, production, and management processes must also adapt, requiring flexibility and growth both across the firm and in the
capabilities of the management team.
A promising startup developed and patented a
unique mechanism and design for window shades
for high-end corporate aircraft. Within a few
years after winning a substantial original equipment manufacturing (OEM) contract and successfully penetrating the replacement aftermarket,
the company held a commanding market share in a
small niche at the high end of the market characterized by customers who were focused on customization and insensitive to price. In order to
grow, the company needed to broaden its offering
to penetrate the mainstream market with a standardized whole product–—simpler, less costly, and
easier to install. Although the company attempted to launch several new products aimed
at the mainstream market, it was unable to adapt
the product designs or internal processes to the
challenges of volume production and was ultimately unsuccessful.
2.3. The third hurdle: Maintaining a
customer/market focus
In the early days of a startup, the founder is
often the lead product developer, chief salesperson, and customer service representative.
When something goes wrong in the hands of a
customer–—as it inevitably does–—the feedback loop
from customer service to product development is
almost instantaneous, the message comes through
loud and clear, and the firm responds promptly and
effectively.
As the firm grows, specialization takes over and
layers of organization appear. New employees are
hired, functional boundaries are established, and
informal patterns of communication eventually
break down. Information about design defects or
other issues flows erratically from the field service
representative to a manager, from one manager to
another, and ultimately to top management and
back down to the product development team that
must address the issue. This takes time, and the
inevitable filtering process often results in distorted
messages and the loss of a sense of urgency. From
the customer’s perspective, the firm appears to be
less responsive than it once was and frustration
builds.
Conflicts often arise between the need for
stability and standardization in operations and
customer demands for customization, variety, and
responsiveness. These must be resolved, taking into
account both the needs of current and prospective
customers and internal constituents.
I was recruited as CEO for a small company
providing modems and data input devices to the
personal computer industry. A year and a half
earlier, the company had secured a contract–—
representing nearly a third of the company’s
business–—to provide a key component to a major
manufacturer of laptop computers. Early in my
tenure, the VP of sales and I called on this customer
with the objective of solidifying the relationship
and ensuring that our product was specified into
the next generation of their product. The visit did
not go well. The customer showed us data that
indicated that our device had been at the top of
their customer complaint list for 9 consecutive
months. Back at the plant, I inquired about the
problem and asked to see the results of the product
reliability testing. The test results were unavailable; they had never performed any testing. The
engineering department had been aware of the
customer’s dissatisfaction but had chosen not to
share the information with sales or product marketing, hoping it would go away over time. I immediately launched an accelerated testing program
EXECUTIVE DIGEST 591
and isolated and then corrected the source of
problem, but the relationship with the customer
was beyond repair.
Internal communications had clearly broken
down. Engineering and sales did not communicate.
Finger pointing and blame shifting were standard
operating procedure. As critical problems were
swept under the rug rather than being addressed,
the entire culture turned sour. This all-too-common
pattern can be avoided with proper organizational
design, process, and discipline, institutionalizing an
appropriate customer/market focus from top to
bottom.
2.4. The fourth hurdle: Building an
organization and management team
Professional investors have often been quoted
as saying ‘It’s all about the management team.’
Although they are interested in the breakthrough
product and the untapped market opportunity, they
recognize that good management is the most essential element. Building an organization and a team is
among the entrepreneur’s most critical tasks, but it
requires considerably more than just hiring people
who appear to be qualified and assuming that they
can do the job. The demands and pressures on an
organization change significantly overthe life cycle,
requiring careful planning and flexibility to ensure
that staffing and structure are aligned with strategy
and the needs of the business. Failure to do so often
results in critical skills not on board at the right
time, key people stretched beyond their capabilities, ineffective decision processes, and a lack of
accountability (Fombrun & Wally, 1989).
The organizational evolution of emerging companies follows a predictable pattern, from a structure in which everyone reports to the founder to a
functional organization to, eventually, a divisional
structure. It is not unusual in these transitions for
communications to break down, important information to fall through the cracks, decisions to be
delayed, and key challenges to remain unresolved.
As new roles are created and specialists are hired, it
is important to establish structures and processes
that facilitate effective communications and decision making.
A small company in a crowded marketplace for
banking software had been spun out of a larger
organization and was struggling to gain traction. A
sagging stock price had triggered the concern of the
board and I was retained as a consultant to recommend actions to improve performance.
The CEO and the VP of software engineering had
held similar positions in the previous organization
and had worked together for years. Sales, customer
service, and the financial organization were headed
by individuals new to the company and more than
20 years younger than the CEO and the engineering
VP, the latter of whom was semi-retired and only in
the office 1 or 2 days a week.
Although the core product was solid, the entire
organization was dysfunctional; cross-departmental
communications and coordination were nonexistent. Sales specified customer requirements–—
which frequently involved extensive customization–—
engineering configured the product, and customer
service was responsible for installation and implementation. Communications between sales
and customer service and the engineering team
were limited and usually relayed through the CEO
or his personal assistant. A great deal of relevant
information fell through the cracks and wide gaps
often appeared between customer expectations
and the delivered product. Dissatisfied customers
and a deteriorating reputation in the industry had
triggered the stock price decline.
Shortly after this was reported to the board, a
new CEO was appointed and both the original CEO
and the VP of software engineering retired. Within
months, the directors negotiated the sale of the
company to its principal competitor. The internal
issues were addressed and the company is now
prospering as a division of a larger firm.
2.5. The fifth hurdle: Developing
effective processes and infrastructures
In its early days, a venture is small enough that the
entrepreneur can oversee every aspect of day-today operations and a firm can get by on the basis of
ad hoc processes and controls. In transition, however, growth and functional specialization require
the development of effective infrastructures to
develop projects and manage customer relationships, operations, and finance (Flamholtz & Randle,
2000).
Startups compete not only on the basis of products or services, but on their ability to effectively
deliver and support them. Customer-facing activities essential to attracting and building sustainable
customer relationships demand flexibility, responsiveness, and individualized attention. Internal
operations–—the production, delivery, and aftermarket support of the firm’s offerings–—typically need
structure and standardized processes to achieve
efficiency and low cost. These conflicting imperatives require a judicious balance.
Increasing transaction volumes in sales, billing,
purchasing, and production often expose the
limitations of ad hoc processes. When functional
specialization requires that communications span
592 EXECUTIVE DIGEST
organizational boundaries, structure and process
become essential and a flexible work environment
becomes difficult to manage (Boeker & Wiltbank,
2005).
When infrastructure processes are weak or missing, ventures risk the alienation of customers, lost
sales, misallocated resources, and compromised
operational or financial control. Infrastructure processes are rarely of the one-size-fits-all variety–—
continual change and evolution is typical as a firm
grows. Effective planning is essential to avoid the
chaos that inevitably occurs when market success
leads to activity levels that overwhelm existing
systems.
A supplier of OEM products for the marine and
aviation industries built its reputation on flexibility, responsiveness, and customized designs using a
variety of exotic materials and finishes. Coordination between engineering and manufacturing was
often based on marked up drawings and informal
communications. Errors, confusion, and rework became common, as activity increased with growth.
A newly hired production manager, relying on his
previous experience in a high-volume manufacturing operation, insisted on the installation of a
complex system designed for a stable production
line environment. The system required a complete
engineering drawing package and bill of materials
for every job and took nearly a year to implement.
Flexibility and customer responsiveness evaporated, delivery lead times extended from an average
of 10 weeks to more than 16, and internal conflict
was high. Eventually, the new manager was terminated. The system was scrapped and replaced by a
simpler, more flexible manufacturing process appropriate for the custom product environment. It
took almost another year to recover and restore
normal lead times. In the meantime, the cost of lost
business and customer goodwill was substantial.
Management systems are equally important. As
an organization grows and matures, organizational
structures, planning, accounting, human resource,
management development, and performance management systems become increasingly important.
At each stage in an organization’s development,
these systems must be developed, enhanced, and
fine-tuned in order to accommodate the evolving
needs of the business.
2.6. The sixth hurdle: Building financial
capability
For the inexperienced entrepreneur, it is often all
about raising capital. The assumption is that once
that initial check is in the bank, success is at hand.
Building financial capability for the long haul
involves a lot more just selling an idea to investors
and cashing the check. Investors and lenders
are interested in the efficient utilization of the
funds and expect a return on every dollar invested.
Although they recognize that startups often involve
unproven markets and high levels of risk, and
require significant investments before a viable
product emerges, most deals are structured in
stages to minimize risk and limit investment until
key milestones have been achieved.
Entrepreneurs must maintain credibility and
manage financial resources prudently, focusing efforts and resources on the right activities, managing
capital and cashflow efficiently, delivering reliably
on financial projections, and demonstrating responsible behavior in managing other people’s money.
Spurred by expansive forecasts of the demand
for internet bandwidth, venture capital funds invested heavily in startups that provided sophisticated optical switches and other components for
fiber-optic communications networks. When the
actual demand for bandwidth fell short of projections, the components market collapsed in early
2006. The venture investors pulled the plug on a
Dallas-based manufacturer of optical switches and
other networking gear, wrote off their $172 million
investment, and sold the residual assets for
$3.4 million.
The CEO, a personal friend, had been scheduled
to speak to a student group a few days later. I asked
him if he wanted to cancel, but he offered to go
ahead and meet with the students. He told them
that after nearly 4 years of development, the
company had been about to launch its first products
into the market when the investors shut the company down. When he had finished his presentation, I
asked him, “How much more funding would you
have needed to launch the products and get to
breakeven?” He replied, “About $13 million–—we
were almost there!” After a brief pause, I asked
him “What keeps you up at night?” His response was
almost immediate: “I keep going over and over it in
my mind–—adding up the $13 million that we spent
that we really didn’t need to at the time. If we’d
been more frugal in the early years, we might still
be in business today.”
This company had been caught in the downdraft
of a broad-based market collapse, but the CEO had
also been the unwitting victim of his own enthusiasm and belief in the optimistic market forecasts.
Investors and lenders do not expect perfect foresight, but they do expect prudent management of
the financial resources they provide. They have
limited patience with CEOs who overpromise and
under-deliver and otherwise abuse the relationship
of trust. The savvy entrepreneur executes to the
EXECUTIVE DIGEST 593
plan, anticipates financing needs, builds relationships, and establishes credibility with financing
sources well before the need for additional resources arises.
2.7. The seventh hurdle: Developing and
nurturing a culture
Established organizations have cultures that, for
better or worse, support or constrain the implementation of their strategies. Culture plays many
roles in the development of an organization. It
defines purpose, leads to consensus and a shared
vision, and provides a consistent image to markets,
customers, and suppliers. Culture also contributes
to integration, coordination, and control. It sets
standards and defines the boundaries of acceptable
behavior both within the firm and in its interactions
with its environment.
Founders have a unique opportunity to shape and
mold a culture that reflects a set of values, beliefs
and norms thatfully support and reinforce the firm’s
business purpose and strategy (Schein, 1983). The
failure to do so risks the unwitting development of a
dysfunctional culture that precipitates the failure
of the firm. Changing a dysfunctional culture is
difficult, challenging, and usually time-consuming.
Early in my career, I took over the financial
operations of a large organization. Over 10 million
transactions were processed each month. The culture was dysfunctional. Most of the accounting
clerks were minority females earning close to the
minimum wage, all of the supervisors were middleaged white men and women, and several were
regarded as abusive to their employees. The facility was surrounded by a 10-foot fence and razor wire
in a troubled part of town and management rarely
visited. Morale was terrible, productivity was low
and error rates high, and turnover was more than
40% annually. Three discrimination lawsuits were
pending and a union organizing drive was underway.
In less than a year, with a new team in place, we
reorganized the workflow, replaced more than half
of the supervisors by promoting from the ranks, and
instituted a team-based compensation system.
Management became highly visible. We held our
staff meetings in the facility, walked the floor at
least twice a week, made a point to get to know the
employees as individuals, tracked team performance, and instituted merit pay. Performance improved dramatically, errors virtually disappeared,
and the monthly closing cycle was shortened to
10 days from the previous 60. The discrimination
complaints were settled or dropped, the union
organizing drive lost momentum, and turnover
dropped to a manageable 15%.
Although the turnaround was enabled by workflow
and process improvements, it was largely empowered by cultural change. We listened to the employees, responded to their concerns, and consistently
demonstrated that management cared about them
and their welfare. When we arrived, the situation
was so bad that almost any change would have been
seen as a positive, but good management and a
supportive culture made a huge difference.
2.8. The eighth hurdle: Managing risks
and vulnerabilities
Small, rapidly growing entrepreneurial firms are
particularly vulnerable to disruptions, including the
generic risks peculiar to the startup environment:
 Technical risks (Will the product work? Will it
scale?);
 Market risks (Is there a legitimate need? Can we
charge enough to generate profits? Is the size
of the opportunity sufficient to justify the
investment?);
 Competitive risks (How will competitors react? Can
the firm sustain a competitive advantage?); and
 Execution risks (Does the management team have
relevant skills and experience?).
Risks arise from many sources, including rapid
growth, inexperienced employees, inadequate infrastructures and information management, and a
bias toward entrepreneurial risk taking (Simons,
1999). A narrow revenue base (reliance on a single
product or a few customers) puts all the eggs in one
basket. Limited resources provide little or no margin for error, inexperienced management may overlook early warning signs, and larger competitors
with greater staying power may do their best to
drive small competitors out of a market.
These are predictable and manageable risks,
often overlooked by inexperienced entrepreneurs.
Proactive management requires recognition of
potential risks, identification of weak links, and
actions to address vulnerabilities before they
become crises.
3. Final thoughts
The eight hurdles of transition are essential steps in
the growth and maturation of the entrepreneurial
enterprise as it evolves from a nascent startup to an
emerging organization positioned for sustained and
594 EXECUTIVE DIGEST
profitable growth. The well-documented rates of
early startup demise can often be traced to the
failure to clear one or more of the eight hurdles of
transition as the inexperienced entrepreneur scales
prematurely, seeking rapid growth before laying a
solid foundation. Clearing the hurdles and winning
the race requires that the entrepreneur and the
founding team:
 Establish, communicate, and maintain a clear
sense of direction;
 Position and reposition the offering as required to
meet the needs of an expanded market;
 Develop and implement internal processes to
ensure customer responsiveness;
 Build a capable and committed management
team aligned with the strategic direction;
 Implement decision processes and infrastructures appropriate to the stage of development;
 Build financial capability focused on the efficient
utilization of available resources;
 Nurture a culture thatreflects values, beliefs, and
norms supportive of the business purpose; and
 Recognize the inherent vulnerabilities of an
emerging enterprise and proactively manage
risks.
Each of these is essential. The failure to clear one or
more of these hurdles during the critical period of
transition risks the demise of the new venture. I
have outlined the essential tasks to be undertaken
and provided experience-based guidance for laying
a solid foundation. The rest is up to the entrepreneur and the founding team.
References
Aulet, B. (2013). Disciplined entrepreneurship: 24 steps to a
successful startup. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Blank, S. (2013). Why the lean startup changes everything.
Harvard Business Review, 91(5), 63—72.
Boeker, W., & Karichalil, R. (2002). Entrepreneurial transitions:
Factors influencing founder departure. Academy of Management Journal, 45(3), 818—826.
Boeker, W., & Wiltbank, R. (2005). New venture evolution
and managerial capabilities. Organization Science, 16(2),
123—133.
Bureau of Labor Statistics (2016). Entrepreneurship and the U.S.
economy: Survival rates of establishments, by year started
and number of years since starting, 1994—2015. Available at
http://www.bls.gov/bdm/entrepreneurship/bdm_chart3.
htm
Drucker, P. (1985). Innovation and entrepreneurship. New York:
HarperCollins.
Flamholtz, E., & Randle, Y. (2000). Growing pains: Transitioning
from an entrepreneurship to a professionally managed firm.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Fombrun, C. J., & Wally, S. (1989). Structuring small firms
for rapid growth. Journal of Business Venturing, 4(2),
107—122.
Gorman, M., & Sahlman, W. A. (1989). Journal of Business
Venturing, 4(4), 231—248.
Greiner, L. (1972). Evolution and revolution as organizations
grow. Harvard Business Review, 50(4), 37—46.
Hambrick, D., & Crozier, L. (1985). Stumblers and stars in the
management of rapid growth. Journal of Business Venturing,
1(1), 31—45.
Hofer, C. W., & Charan, R. (1984). The transition to professional
management: Mission impossible? American Journal of Small
Business, 9(1), 1—11.
Johnson, M. W., Christensen, C. M., & Kagermann, H. (2008).
Reinventing your business model. Harvard Business Review,
86(12), 50—59.
Kroeger, C. (1974). Managerial development in the small firm.
California Management Review, 17(1), 41—47.
Moore, G. (1991). Crossing the chasm: Marketing and selling
disruptive products to mainstream customers. New York:
HarperCollins.
Picken, J. (2017). From founder to CEO: The entrepreneur’s
roadmap. Business Horizons, 60(1), 7—14.
Ruhnka, J., Feldman, H., & Dean, T. (1992). The living dead
phenomena in venture capital investments. Journal of Business Venturing, 7(2), 137—155.
Schein, E. (1983). The role of the founder in creating organizational culture. Organizational Dynamics, 12(1), 13—28.
Schindehutte, M., Morris, M., & Pitt, L. (2009). Rethinking
marketing: The entrepreneurial imperative. Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Simons, R. (1999). How risky is your company? Harvard Business
Review, 77(3), 85—94.
Steinmetz, L. (1969). Critical stages of small business growth.
Business Horizons, 12(1), 29—36.
Wasserman, N. (2003). Founder-CEO succession and the paradox
of entrepreneurial success. Organization Science, 14(2),
149—172.
EXECUTIVE DIGEST 595


Entrepreneurial path: decoupling
the complexity of
entrepreneurial process
Kostas Galanakis
Nottingham Business School, Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham, UK, and
Paraskevi Giourka
Department of Production and Management Engineering,
Democritus University of Thrace, Xanthi, Greece
Abstract
Purpose – The purpose of this paper is to synthesise the socioeconomic context, personality, knowledge
and social capital into a systemic framework, named the “entrepreneurial path” that demonstrates the
process of transforming initial entrepreneurial intentions to a growing venture. This systemic framework
decouples the overall complexity of the entrepreneurial realisation to three main subsystems: entrepreneurial
intentions and venture idea formation; barriers of transition from nascent to active entrepreneur; and active
and growing ventures.
Design/methodology/approach – The paper employs a systemic thinking approach to decouple the
complexity of the subject. Survey techniques and digital social network discussion forums were used for the
collection of primary qualitative data from multiple stakeholders.
Findings – The conceptual framework, named the entrepreneurial path, highlights the importance of
different factors at each stage of the entrepreneurial realisation. Especially the importance of factors such as
perceived desirability, feasibility, self-efficacy, network ties and social capital has been identified as central.
Needs for managerial skills and resources for the new venture come to play only on the later stage. Each of
those factors though, plays a distinctive role in the different stages of the realisation and in dependence to the
maturity of the entrepreneurial context.
Research limitations/implications – Further research may examine whether these factors that have been
identified by successful entrepreneurs and stakeholders are reflecting the experience for those who have not
been successful in their effort to create their venture.
Practical implications – The entrepreneurial path provides a supportive tool for: academics designing
focussed entrepreneurship education programmes and research; managers in intermediate structures to
identify the specific needs of nascent and early-stage entrepreneurs in comparison to the needs of
entrepreneurs in the growth stage; and for policy makers prioritising on supportive structures and
institutions directing their actions to specific stages or barriers of the process or creating holistic and evolving
structures based on the maturity of the entrepreneurial context.
Originality/value – The decoupling of the process of transforming initial entrepreneurial intentions to a
growing venture demonstrates that different approaches are required in order to foster each one of the factors
identified. Focussing on activities and resources on one stage at the time, or presenting parallel activities that
reflect the different level of maturity of regions, institutions, individuals and societal perceptions may provide
better service to nascent and active entrepreneurs, than considering treating entrepreneurial intentions as a
unified process.
Keywords Self-efficacy, Systems thinking, Entrepreneurial intentions, Social capital,
Entrepreneurial context, Network ties
Paper type Research paper
Introduction
Entrepreneurs are recognised as important players and indispensable capital in the world
economy as they are one of the generators of employment and income (Etzkowitz et al.,
2000). Start-ups, especially university spin-offs, are endogenous sources of innovation and
growth, as they generate substantial spill over effect for their regional economy (Fretshner
et al., 2013). Additionally, business survival rates and “employability” chances have been
shown to be higher in individuals with university entrepreneurship education than their
International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Behavior &
Research
Vol. 23 No. 2, 2017
pp. 317-335
© Emerald Publishing Limited
1355-2554
DOI 10.1108/IJEBR-03-2016-0079
Received 11 March 2016
Revised 28 July 2016
13 September 2016
Accepted 2 October 2016
The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
www.emeraldinsight.com/1355-2554.htm
317
Entrepreneurial
path
non-academic colleagues (Kohn et al., 2010). In this context, policy makers and academics
agree on the importance of designing policies and tools for encouraging and supporting
entrepreneurship (Oosterbeek et al., 2010).
Many studies have examined the relationship between entrepreneurship education and
entrepreneurial career choice with either trait approach or intention-based approaches
(Fayolle et al., 2006; Matlay, 2008; Souitaris et al., 2007).
Entrepreneurship education is considered as one of the main tools for inspiring
entrepreneurial spirit and equipping students with the entrepreneurial skills they need to
create new ventures (European Commission, 2008; Kuratko, 2005). Educational institutions
provide this necessary knowledge and capabilities (Rasmussen and Sørheim, 2006).
Although there are open questions whether education programmes do enough to transform
intentions to actual entrepreneurial actions (Dewett and Gruys, 2007; Zampetakis et al.,
2011). Research has shown that intentions of students taking entrepreneurship courses seem
to be increased at the end of the students’ participation in entrepreneurship programmes
compared to the beginning (Souitaris et al., 2007).
However, despite all the interest and recognition during the last few decades, research in
the area of entrepreneurship tends to homogenise around the themes of strategy,
performance, entrepreneurial attitude and management. Areas such as personal capital
(knowledge, social and professional networks), the entrepreneurial context and how these
affect the entrepreneurial realisation at different levels is rather emerging themes that have
not yet been considered systematically (Prá Martens et al., 2016).
The objective of this paper is to synthesise the socioeconomic context, personality,
knowledge and social capital into a systemic framework, named the “entrepreneurial path”
that demonstrates the process of transforming initial entrepreneurial intentions to a
growing venture. This systemic framework decouples the overall complexity of the
entrepreneurial realisation to three main subsystems: entrepreneurial intentions and
venture idea formation; barriers of transition from nascent to active entrepreneur; and active
and growing ventures. The aim is to provide a guideline to tailor research, supportive
policies and educational programmes that foster entrepreneurial intentions and activities for
each of the different stage. One research question has been shaped to achieve the objective:
RQ1. How the personal, socioeconomic and institutional contextual factors are
interrelated to shape the different stages of the entrepreneurial process?
We employed a mix of traditional and contemporary research techniques, exploring
experiences and perceptions across Europe regarding the nature of skills and characteristics
of entrepreneurs, and depicting factors fostering entrepreneurial activity and contributing to
the success of an entrepreneurial venture. These empirical findings are synthesised with
previous studies on a systemic framework, using a system thinking approach. The second
section describes the methodology and practices used in this study. The following section
builds the conceptual framework of the entrepreneurial path, step-by-step, based on previous
research. The fourth section provides the analysis of the primary data based on the conceptual
framework. The paper closes with the discussion of the research question and conclusions of
this research that illustrate the complexity of the overall conceptual framework.
The entrepreneurial path concept
The phases of the entrepreneurial process and the importance of entrepreneurial attitudes
and the characteristics of entrepreneurs are addressed by the Global Entrepreneurship
Monitor (GEM) using a socioeconomic approach (Bosma et al., 2012). Four distinctive phases
are identified in this model: potential entrepreneurs shape their beliefs and develop their
abilities with an intention to choose an entrepreneurial career path; early-stage
entrepreneurial activity leads to nascent or actual new ventures; established business;
318
IJEBR
23,2
and, if either the early stages or the established business fail, discontinuation. Traits closely
related to entrepreneurial potential such as innovativeness, locus of control, risk-taking
propensity and tolerance for ambiguity, are related to the intentions of individuals to start a
new venture (Gurel et al., 2010; Liñán and Chen, 2009; Segal et al., 2005). In addition,
psychological and socio-cultural backgrounds of individuals such as cultural values, social
exposure, entrepreneurial disposition, family tradition, education, as well as demographic
factors have also been identified to have an effect on entrepreneurial intentions along with
entrepreneurial self-efficacy (Gurel et al., 2010; Lans et al., 2010; Liñán and Chen, 2009; Pruett
et al., 2009; Shinnar et al., 2012) in contrast to entrepreneurial planning (Cox, 2014).
Expanding the GEM framework to include the personal traits that affect the decision and
the progress of the entrepreneurial process and the social traits that present opportunities or
threats on any economic activity create a new generic conceptual framework (Figure 1).
This framework provides an overall view of the path and the possible influences in the
entrepreneurial realisation.
The next sections illustrate in more detail the factors and their interrelation that influence
each stage: the initial entrepreneurial intentions and the generation of venture ideas; the
transition barrier to an active entrepreneur; and the creation and growth of new ventures.
Formation of entrepreneurial intentions and venture ideas
It can be argued that the social and cultural environment may have an effect on intentions
that result to the choice of an entrepreneurial career (Shapero et al., 1982). Factors like
family, peer groups, ethnic group, educational and professional context seem to influence
someone’s decision on creating a new venture. Recently, Klyver et al. (2012) showed that,
often, the most important force towards an entrepreneurial career is the personal ties to an
entrepreneurial network through their family, social or professional connections. These
networks play a multifaceted role, in the realisation of entrepreneurship and the
entrepreneurial process itself, relating for example, ideas with market needs (Klyver et al.,
2012) or the success of the venture (Hoang and Antoncic, 2003; Pellinen, 2014). In addition,
Scholin et al. (2016) posit that desire and ability for entrepreneurial career intentions
accumulate gradually within an individual at a family context while they are triggered by
external events or personal revelation (Scholin et al., 2016).
Other studies show that gender difference in the attitude towards engaging to
entrepreneurial activity can be linked to environment conditions and practices of
entrepreneurial education (Verheul et al., 2011). Preference for self-employment is an
Social Traits: Socioeconomic and Institutional Context and Perceptions
Personal Traits: Personality,
Attitudes, Knowledge and Social ties
Spill overs Economic
Growth
Drop/Discontinued/Failed
Entrepreneurship
Intentions
Venture
Growth
New Venture
Creation
Transformation
to Venture Idea
Transition
Barrier
Figure 1.
The overall
entrepreneurial
realisation process
319
Entrepreneurial
path
important factor and relevant research has shown that men have a higher preference for
self-employment than women (Blanchflower et al., 2001; Grilo and Irigoyen, 2006).
Furthermore, male entrepreneurs benefit from a more diverse network ties although
women have a significant more positive attitude towards networking, especially once the
venture has been created (Dawson et al., 2011). Research suggests that women seem to
attach a high value to the institutional supportive framework and to the specific,
socioeconomic context, considering it as a major factor of uncertainty more often than an
environment for opportunities, when deciding whether or not to run a business. Although
they show a similar lever of belief on being capable of taking control of their own lives
(Verheul et al., 2011).
Transition barrier from nascent to active entrepreneur
Perceptions and attitudes are often crucial factors that allow an individual to overcome the
barrier of transition from nascent to active entrepreneurship. Shapero et al. (1982), in his
research, states that the intent to start a business derives from perceptions of both,
desirability and feasibility, which are partly formed by the person’s knowledge and
understanding and partly by the institutional environment. The theory of planned
behaviour (TPB) and the intention-based models (Ajzen, 1991) have been frequently used to
explain the mental process leading up to founding a business. TPB presents three
motivational factors, or antecedents influencing entrepreneurial behaviour (Ajzen, 1991):
attitude towards start-up (personal attitude) refers to the extent to which the individual
holds a positive or negative personal valuation about becoming an entrepreneur (Autio et al.,
2001). Subjective norms measures the perceived social pressure to carry out – or not
entrepreneurial behaviours. These norms refer to the perception that reference people for
example, family, friends and role models would approve of the decision to become an
entrepreneur, or not. This is supported by the work of Dunn and Holtz-Eakin (2000) that
identify parents’ own entrepreneurial success to have an impact on the transition of an
individual into self-employment. Perceived behavioural control refers to the perception of
the ease or difficulty of becoming an entrepreneur. This perceived feasibility is also linked to
availability of financial capital that is shown to have a large influence on the transition
phase (Dunn and Holtz-Eakin, 2000).
In addition, trust in entrepreneurial activities is another element that may facilitate or
hinder the transition. Trust refers not only to personal relations but is also linked to
institutional trust. Institutional trust refers to the basic level of reliability of exchanges
and also to the enforcement of laws and regulations when required (Welter and Smallbone,
2006). This provides a transparent environment for enterprises to operate and grow
without extra barriers. A transparent institutional framework supports the notion of
feasibility as it reduces potential barriers. This however, requires a level of institutional
maturity that comes in the long term as a consequence of the economic growth.
Propensity to act (Segal et al., 2005) – which refers to the personal disposition to act on
one’s decision, echoing the will of a person to act (“I will do it”) – reflects the concept of
self-efficacy. “Highest self-efficacy”, or the so called “soft skills”, often considered in a
much higher importance than the knowledge or practical business skills in order to
engage in a new venture. For example: “ability to spot and recognise opportunities”, “high
personal perseverance”, “high human and social capital” and superior “social skills”.
These skills affect the extent to which an individual believes that can organise prioritise
and effectively execute actions to accomplish her/his ideas (Bridge et al., 2009; Jung et al.,
2001, Lamine et al., 2014), to withstand and quickly overcome adversity (Markman
and Baron, 2003), or the ability to distinguish between high potential and low potential
opportunities, obstacles and risks before they become obsolete or unbearable (De Clerq
and Arenius, 2006).
320
IJEBR
23,2
Active and growing ventures
Ulhøi (2005) posits that economic activity is embedded in social relations and such relations
influence the creation of new ventures and the “art of running a business”. This position is
further supported by Gnyawali and Ravindranath (2001) who argue that network relations
may increase the likelihood of competitive advantage mainly because of increased access to
resources and information. Especially in small communities, social skills which is defined as
“an individual’s ability to effectively develop, maintain, and utilize social capital can provide
access to information and finance” (Bauernschuster et al., 2010; Jonsson, 2014; Lamine et al.,
2014). Welter and Smallbone (2006) support the idea that the potential to use networks and
social relations in building a new venture is based on the principle of trust. Research in the
field has shown that building heterogeneous networks increases the likelihood of creating a
venture (Renzulli et al., 2000) and assists in creating legitimacy within the market (Aldrich,
2000). Legitimacy, especially for a new venture and particularly for innovative
entrepreneurs is linked with being trusted by suppliers, customers and creditors.
This paper builds on previous research described above regarding the linkage of different
factors to the different stages of realising a new venture. The conceptual framework developed
emphasises on decoupling the complexity of entrepreneurial intentions becoming entrepreneurial
realisation. By examining how these factors help or hinder the realisation of a new venture we
can analyse their impact on individuals and thus inform policies and educational programmes.
Method and research strategy
The focus of systems thinking is on helping to improve decision making by analysing the
processes through which decisions emerge and by improving how the system works.
Systems thinking perceive a problem as a set of circumstances with extreme ambiguity and
sometimes disagreement about its definition between the people or organisations that are
involved and who do not always operate in a predictable manner. The framework is
constructed step-by-step and aims, through the insights from the debates that take place
between theory, empirical observations and interconnections of different aspects, to make
explicit the aspects of reality and understand why reality reacts in such a way (Checkland,
1993; Pidd, 1996). In this case to understand what shapes and influences entrepreneurial
intentions and actions at the different stages of the entrepreneurial realisation.
The empirical part of the study adopted an explanatory method, using qualitative data.
The qualitative data were collected in two stages: open-ended questions and semi-structured
interviews (Bryman et al., 2008) and virtual discussion forums, using digital social networks
for depicting perceptions and create debates between different stakeholders. This
combination of approaches reinforce the systems thinking modelling process, which is
based on the dialogue between different stakeholders and by providing current empirical
evidences to observations that derive from previous research and debating factors that may
lead to conflicting directions (Pidd, 1996).
The characteristics of the first stage
A questionnaire survey, including open questions, was designed to depict the experiences
and perceptions, regarding factors that may lead to become and succeed as an entrepreneur.
The questionnaire included the following categories of questions:
(1) the profile of the young entrepreneurs (Tables AI and AII);
(2) their experiences and their perceptions regarding the nature of entrepreneurial
activity; and
(3) the personality characteristics required to undertake entrepreneurial activity; and
(4) the skills required by entrepreneurs to succeed.
321
Entrepreneurial
path
An invitation was sent to 100 young entrepreneurs who have started entrepreneurial
activity in the last five years[1]. In total, 53 questionnaires were completed and were codified
based on content analysis (Bryman, 2012). The codification during the analysis resulted in
two categories: C1 operational type of factors and C2 personality type of factors.
In order to complement the findings and ensure that the data provide a better
understanding of the survey results, the researchers conducted interviews based on the
initial data codification. These interviews created a “trail-story” for each participant[2].
Characteristics of the virtual forums
In parallel the researchers developed a set of digital discussion forums. These created virtual
social interaction with peers, with the use of digital social networks as a means of the recent
experienced social reality (Denzin and Lincoln, 2005). The discussion forums were activated
on LinkedIn for a period of three months and managed by the researchers. The participants
were invited by the researchers through an original network of contacts across Europe.
Further participants were invited by the original participants ensuring their genuine identity
to the organisers of the forums. The discussion forums initial questions[3] were:
• Entrepreneurs: are they born or made?
• Is entrepreneurship a team or an individual sport?
• Does university foster entrepreneurship?
• Male vs female entrepreneur: who does it better? Are they working under the same
conditions?
In total, 25 persons participated in the discussion forums with a total of more than
80 input posts. The participants were a mix of academics, students, young entrepreneurs,
professionals, business people and professionals in intermediary organisations. The
discussions focussed mainly on the factors influencing entrepreneurial intentions and
the transition towards active entrepreneur from the personality perspective and the
socioeconomic perspective.
Capturing the perception of informants through virtual forums have advantages but also
limitations. Advantages of asynchronous communication of time and place can be the
extended access to participants, compared to face-to-face interviews as there is no need to
identify a convenient time and place for capturing the information (Coomber, 1997) while
ensuring a degree of anonymity (Bampton and Cowton, 2002). Another advantage is that it
reduces the cost of travel and provides the possibility to interview in a foreign language using
translation tools. Limitations can be that the chance of a spontaneous answer to a question is
smaller as the informant has more time to reflect to a question. It depends of course to the
nature of the question if this spontaneity is an advantage or a disadvantage. Another
limitation is the reduction of social cues as the body language cannot be used as a source of
extra information. In order to reduce the effect of these disadvantages the researchers
monitored the activity in the groups and often used humorous and informal language to create
a relaxed environment among the participants, triggering replies from other participants and
often used emoticons to express feelings and social cues. Finally, disadvantage of
asynchronous communication of place is that the interviewer has no view on the situation in
which the interviewee is situated (Opdenakker, 2006). This last disadvantage has little effect in
our study as the participants were invited by a network of contacts across Europe.
Analysis of results
The conceptual framework that has been formed at the theoretical part of the paper
(Figures 2-4) is compared with the findings from the primary research. Participant in the
322
IJEBR
23,2
discussion forum “The entrepreneurs: are they born or made?” quoted an interview with Herb
Kelleher, Chairman and CEO of Southwest Airlines, (Babson Insight Staff, 2003), concluding
that there is no specific list of personal features which lead to entrepreneurial activity.
The answer lies in the right mix of personal attributes, which form an engaging and proactive
work ethos, and the encouragement and enrichment of this ethos with skills that are developed
both by the environment and the broader education that a person may receive.
Findings in relation to formation of intentions and ideas stages
Participants in “The entrepreneurs: are they born or made?” discussion forum agreed with
Autio et al. (2013) that the socioeconomic context affects significantly the entrepreneurial
intentions. The socioeconomic environment provides triggers that we tend to treat as
opportunities or necessities and that entrepreneurship is one of the approaches to transform
them into valuable activities. If the entrepreneurial approach has been cultivated over time
and considered as central under the subjective norms, then it is more likely for a young
person to consider such a career, especially when they have personal or family ties with
others that are considered as successful (role models).
The nascent entrepreneurs then employee their knowledge and skills that are earned
from their broader education to direct the core of their activity. The triple role of universities
to transfer and generate knowledge, form personalities and lead society’s perceptions and
actively influence policy making and regulation forming, was raised by several members of
the “Does university foster entrepreneurship?” forum. In parallel they mentioned the role of
educational systems in supporting and boosting soft skills, such as creativity and
adaptability, and interdisciplinary collaboration. Participants highlighted that universities
need to encourage a holistic educational offering integrating science/technology knowledge,
managerial/business skills and soft skills development in order for their students to be able
Career
Intentions
Personal
attitudes and
values
Entrepreneurial
Career
Intentions
Knowledge-opportunity
and/or necessity
Entrepreneurial
Opportunity
Socioeconomic
environment
Enterprising
Triggers
Perceived
Desirability
Ideas
Formation
Subjective
Norms Societal
Perceptions
Education
system
Societal barriers,
e.g. gender
perceptions and
support
Role
Models Knowledge
and skills
Education
system
Passionate and
proactive work
ethos
Holistic
education
Venture
Ideas
Figure 2.
Formation of
Entrepreneurial
Intentions and
Venture Ideas
323
Entrepreneurial
path
to invest in their creativity or be adaptable to new skill requirements. Participants
commented that the best ideas come when people from different disciplines (engineering,
science, arts and management) come together “shoulder to shoulder” and successfully
interchange ideas. The group effect nurtures creativity and may be demonstrated in many
fields, such as the case of the “Residencia de Estudiantes[4]”, established as early as 1910,
with many famous artists and scientists as residents. Indicatively, a speech from Sir Ken
Robinson was quoted[5] in the forums, who has been an internationally recognised Leader in
the development of education on creativity and innovation (Robinson, 2001, 2009).
He encourages policy makers and educators to rethink their role and build the right
collaborative structures to sustain and enrich the natural creative spirits of every young
person (Table I).
Findings in relation to the transition barriers
Institutions and regulations in combination with barriers raised by bureaucratic systems,
and lack of a formal welfare system – as mentioned in the “Male vs female entrepreneurs”
Subjective
Norms
Supportive
institutional
context
Personal/Gender
Anticipation
Institutional
Maturity
Institutional
Trust
Institutional
Maturity
Fair, stable,
easy to access
Welfare
System
Perceived
Feasibility
Perceived
Desirability
Role
Models
Work
Ethos Group
Effect
Knowledge and
Understanding
Decisive
vision and
Venture ambition
Ideas
Transition
Barrier
New Venture
Creation
Clear
Leadership
Figure 3.
The transition barrier
from nascent to active
entrepreneur
324
IJEBR
23,2
forum – discourages young people from engaging in entrepreneurial activities. Furthermore,
participants agreed that the education system should lead the effort to correct the
misconception that entrepreneurship is a male only game. In the “Male vs female
entrepreneur” forum participants agreed that the reason that new ventures are created
predominantly by men is not because they are better entrepreneurs but rather due to the
different roles that society expects men and women to play and the nature and availability
of the supporting structures. The anticipation of their roles makes it easier for men to
engage in entrepreneurial activities. In the “Does university foster entrepreneurship?” and
the “Male vs female entrepreneurs” forums the participants argued that a supportive
entrepreneurial and institutional context is a prerequisite for both male and female
entrepreneurship presence. Often though, this context favours men. To expand female
participation in entrepreneurship, it is a matter of building the right structures and directing
the initiatives strategically for both genders. Furthermore, participants in the forums
mention that in societies, which have replaced their welfare systems with family networks,
such as in Southern Europe, universities could lead on the design and development of a
sustainable welfare system that will eventually benefit both the economy and society at
large – a welfare system that will offer relief and security in case of failure (e.g. re-training
and micro-financing), or support of family needs (e.g. provision of child-care services).
The issue of supportive structures (discussed in the “Does university foster entrepreneurship?”
and cross-disciplinary competence (raised in the forum, “Is entrepreneurship a team sport
or an individual sport”?) raised in the discussion forums. Practices employed by leading
universities include “idea labs”, enterprise support centres, incubators, networking events,
idea/business competitions and a number of undergraduate- and postgraduate-level courses
New Venture
Creation
Entrepreneurial
Social Capital
Art of
Running a
Business
Venture
Growth
Inspire
Trust
Create and
Maintain
Networks Attract
Investment
Institutional
Maturity
Personal
attributes
Seize new
opportunities
Reconfiguring
assets and
structures/
Continuous
improving
Professional
Passionate
Adaptable
Operational
/Dynamic
Capabilities
Innovate
continuously
Figure 4.
The active and
growing venture
325
Entrepreneurial
path
related to entrepreneurship with the active involvement of entrepreneurs and business people
were identified as best practices across Europe. The participants in this discussion broadly agreed
that entrepreneurial activity benefits from the safe environment that academic institutions
present. These structures in addition engage individuals to group activities and ideas are
exchanged easier. The group effect, agreed in the discussion, raises the perceived desirability and
feasibility. This is especially true in the transition stage of transforming an original business idea
into a new venture.
However, some participants observed that although groups are ideal for creativity
and idea generation, it is always necessary to have one “leader” or “champion” who will
push things forward and take the risk of implementation. It was also discussed in the
forum that entrepreneurial firms that started from a group of people often fail unless one
person in the group takes on the role of leader and either continues alone or successfully
remodels the organisational structure towards a management team, providing clear vision
and ambition. As the young entrepreneurs described the best characteristics of
entrepreneurs (Table III) are persistent (Adomako et al., 2016) and willing to take the risk
when others do not.
Forum themes Main outcomes
Entrepreneurs, born or made? Triggers that derive from personal ideas or knowledge are forming to
entrepreneurial opportunities or other career directions, based on the
options that are provided by the socioeconomic context
No specific list of personal features, which lead to entrepreneurship.
It requires
Encouragement and exposure to entrepreneurial activity by the
educational system and the social environment
Cultivation from a young age of general perceptions of personal
success through entrepreneurial based activities
A passionate and proactive work ethos that is not a particular
characteristic of entrepreneurs, but any successful professional
Entrepreneurship, a team sport or
an individual sport?
Creativity thrives through networks and exposure to multidisciplinary
knowledge and points of view
Actual enterprise activity, however, requires a leader to shape a
business and transform a group of individuals into a management
team, with clear values, direction and structure
Does university foster
entrepreneurship?
Most entrepreneurs have a university degree, considerably more than
the general population
Universities have a triple role: to create citizens with broad
understanding and the ability to be critical and to synthesise; to lead
society’s perception and shape personalities; and, to actively influence
policy making. Therefore they need to
Prepare the ground for future scientific and technological developments
Balance practical-employability skills with creativity and general skills
in the university curriculum
Create initiatives and flexible structures, e.g. Ideas Labs, Enterprise
Support Centres, etc., becoming the norm for all universities
Male vs female entrepreneurs Societies have different perceptions of male/female roles, leading to
different level of exposure to the idea of becoming an entrepreneur
Education and welfare system play the most important role and are the
strongest incentives for changing the trends of female entrepreneurial
activity
Universities under their triple role may lead society’s perception and
shape personalities; and, actively influence policy making to break
misconceptions and barriers
Table I.
Discussion forums
main observations
326
IJEBR
23,2
Findings in relation to the active and growing ventures stages
Kauffman Foundation demonstrated that more than 95 per cent of entrepreneurs have a
university degree, with 47 per cent at postgraduate or doctorate level, a much higher
proportion than in the general population (Wadhwa et al., 2009). Our survey shows that
68 per cent of the participants held a university degree – six held a PhD (Table AI).
Furthermore two-third of the participants in our survey founded their new ventures around
their area of studies, applying their knowledge and skills as they identified a new
opportunity emerging from advances in their scientific or technological field. However,
one-third considered entrepreneurial activity as a need for alternative employment.
These results, although they indicate that the majority of entrepreneurs have a high
qualification level, defer from the Kauffman Foundation ones. This reflects that in Europe
often entrepreneurial activity, especially in South Europe, comes as a result of necessity
rather than choice.
In the survey, “entrepreneurial success” is explored from the perspective of the
successful entrepreneur. Two categories of factors were identified, referring to operational
capabilities (or dynamic capabilities as Teece et al., 1997 labels them) and personal
attributes (Markman and Baron, 2003; Stoltz, 2000), shaping the “art of running a
business”. The capabilities that were mentioned more often by the young entrepreneurs
were codified under the labels: “address a need/opportunity/good product/differentiation”,
“continuous research and innovation”, “team and teamwork”, ‘persistence in achieving
quality and continuous improvement, and “being reliable and trustworthy”. Regarding the
personal attributes the participants mentioned that the key to success lies
with the personal working ethos of the entrepreneur such as: “professionalism and hard
work”, being “persistent and passionate”, “open mindedness and adaptability”,
“brave/decisive/confident”, and “ambition/vision” (Table II). The need for “financial
resources” and a “good plan” were mentioned in much lower frequency. These factors
came in relation to the ability of an entrepreneur to attract investment and inspire
trust. These together with the ability of an entrepreneur to create and maintain networks
form the concept of entrepreneurial social capital. Finally the ability and maturity
of the financial system to support with different ways a new venture to escape the
“death valley” (e.g. venture accelerators, business angels, enterprise support centres)
What is the key to be successful as an entrepreneur?
Operational type factors
Proportion of
responses (%) Personal type factors
Proportion of
responses (%)
Address a need/opportunity/
good product/differentiation
20 Professional/hard work 20
Continuous research/
innovation
15 Persistent/passionate 18
Team/teamwork 13 Open minded/ adaptable/learn
every day
16
Persistence in achieving
quality/thorough/continuous
improvement
13 Brave/decisive/confident 11
Reliable/trustworthy 13 Ambition/vision 11
Knowledge/experience 8 Dedicated/focussed/determined 9
Financial resources/good plan 8
Other (networking/good
relationships; luck; take the
first step)
10 Other (humble/self-motivated; cope with
responsibility and stress; believe/ optimistic;
proactive)
14
Table II.
Perception of the
key factors to be
successful as an
entrepreneur
327
Entrepreneurial
path
and accelerate its growth (e.g. high-risk funds) becomes apparent in this
stage of the entrepreneurial realisation as commented by the young entrepreneurs
(Table III).
Discussion of the entrepreneurial path concept
Each region or individual has a different level of understanding and capacity to
explore entrepreneurship. From the point of view of education and supportive
structures, the progressiveness of the framework demonstrates a significant implication
for presenting parallel activities, which are tailored to the different stage that their
socioeconomic and entrepreneurial environment is. For example, investing on breeding
perceived desirability and feasibility to nascent entrepreneurs and to cultivate the
work ethos, social capital and soft skills of students, when the environment is not
mature enough.
The construction of the entrepreneurial path concept demonstrated that the early
stages of career intentions, in the entrepreneurial realisation, are affected mainly from
personal and societal factors (Figure 2). The individual interrelates knowledge,
skills and experiences (e.g. role models) to direct career intentions towards an
entrepreneurial direction. Societal norms and perceptions may encourage or discourage
such activities and often redirect these intentions to career paths that are considered
by society as most rewarding. Individuals that pursue an entrepreneurial career
against the societal norms often are considered by their contemporaries as rebellions
and most passionate, whom the society, paradoxically, may celebrates later as paradigms
of success.
The individuals that follow an entrepreneurial career need to transform intentions to
concrete ideas and anticipate such path as the most desirable and feasible option
(Figure 3). Their ethos, the fusion with others and their knowledge on the area of
their venture may increase the desirability and feasibility perceptions. Till this stage the
need for resources or difficulties in relation to the management of the business have not
raised yet, or overlooked by the desire for action. On the other hand, the socioeconomic
and institutional context might be bypassed by personal qualities; however, this might be
the exception rather than the norm, highlighting the need for a supportive context.
In some cases institutions may be unprepared to overcome stereotypes and reduce
barriers (e.g. bureaucracy or gender stereotypes). In other cases entrepreneurship
may be associated with corruption or the legal and regulatory system might be
3 best characteristics of an entrepreneur
Proportion of
responses (%)
Persistent/patient/determined 18
Visionary/ambitious/intuitive/free spirit/innovative/creative/nuts 17
Professional/hard working/thorough 13
Open minded/open to change/continuous learning 6
Passionate/self-motivated/self-esteem 6
Brave/decisive/confident 6
Humble/self-awareness/self-sacrifice 5
Dedicated/focussed/self-belief 5
Efficient/fast/good manager 5
Leadership/charismatic 4
Other (honest/reliable/responsible; proactive/aggressive; friendly/approachable/
helpful; optimistic; team player; good relationships/networker; customer focussed;
assess other peoples’ experiences; handle stress; intelligent) 16
Table III.
Perception of best
characteristics of
an entrepreneur
328
IJEBR
23,2
considered unstable, slow or favourites specific interests In such cases the role of the
personal leadership is the crucial factor that amplifies the entrepreneurs’ actions
escaping contextual barriers. On the other hand socioeconomic and institutional
context may become a framework that provides support and boost personal efforts.
For example, it may provide a safe space and regulation to try and fail if necessary, or
networks to encourage “group effect”.
Having established a new venture and aiming to growing it, entrepreneurs employee a
different set of qualities. At this stage the personal attributes represent a flexible and
adaptive professional who is able to initiate and maintain networks, inspire trust and attract
financial and other resources. Furthermore, the social capital of the entrepreneur in
combination to the social capital and capabilities of the whole venture (e.g. partners,
employees, intellectual property) take the front stage of importance. The ability of the
entrepreneur to manage these resources under a specific institutional context and adapt
them tirelessly highlights the ability of the new venture to survive the first few years and
grow over time (Figure 4). The institutional framework though has a responsibility to
present a mature and complete set of structures available to any entrepreneur that may
require them.
Conclusions
We conducted this research employing survey techniques in combination to innovative
tools that contemporary technologies, such as the digital social networks, provide us. Often
entrepreneurship is considered as one homogeneous activity that transits from interest and
opportunity recognition (nascent entrepreneur) to exploitation through a new venture
creation (active entrepreneur). However the overall entrepreneurial path (Figure 5)
illustrates a rather complex network of personal and contextual factors that are deployed
progressively into the entrepreneurial realisation. The decoupling of the stages
demonstrates that different approaches are required in order to foster each one of those
factors. Focussing activities and resources on one stage at the time, or presenting parallel
activities that reflect the different level of maturity of regions, institutions, individuals and
societal perceptions may provide better service to nascent and active entrepreneurs, than
considering entrepreneurship as a unified process. The responses in this research
demonstrate a rich activity of supportive actions across Europe; however these are referred
as best practices and not as the norm. Becoming the norm, and be designed to reflect the
contextual framework, these structures and educational programmes, have the potential to
cover the needs of nascent entrepreneurs exploring their ideas and overcoming the
transition barriers.
Thus, a reshaping on the design of supportive structures (e.g. training programmes,
incubators, co-working spaces, accelerators), is suggested by the framework in order to
capture that level of maturity.
Hence, this analytical framework may serve as a supportive tool for academics
designing focussed entrepreneurship education programmes or research, managers in
intermediate structures to identify the specific needs of nascent and early-stage
entrepreneurs and for policy makers prioritising on supportive structures, institutions and
regulations.
Further research may examine whether the factors that have been identified by
participants to play a key role in the different stages of the entrepreneurial realisation are
also applicable for those who have not been successful in their effort to create or grow their
venture. This further analysis may provide information on the, factors that encourage
entrepreneurs who disengage at one of the stages or failed in their original venture to
reengage with the process. Such factors may be related for example, with personal
optimism, or the legal framework.
329
Entrepreneurial
path
Reconfiguring
assets and
structures/
Continuous
improving
Career
Intentions
Subjective
Norms
Personal
attitudes and
values
Enterprising
Triggers
Passionate and
proactive work
ethos
Entrepreneurial
Career
Intentions Venture Ideas
Transition
Barrier
Perceived
Feasibility
Perceived
Desirability
New Venture
Creation
Entrepreneurial
Social Capital
Art of
Running a
Business
Venture
Growth
Role
Models
Work
Ethos Group
Effect
Knowledge and
Understanding
Inspire
Trust
Create and
Maintain
Networks Attract
Investment
Personal/Gender
Anticipation
Institutional
Trust
Knowledge-opportunity
and/or necessity Socioeconomic environment
Societal
Perceptions
Institutional
Maturity
Operational
/Dynamic
Capabilities
Role
Models Entrepreneurial Opportunity
Ideas
Formation
Education
system
Societal barriers,
e.g. gender
perceptions and
support
Knowledge
and skills
Welfare
System
Supportive
institutional
context
Fair, stable,
easy to access
Institutional
Maturity
Subjective
Norms
Institutional
Maturity
Education
system
Decisive
vision and
ambition
Clear
Leadership
Holistic
education
Personal
attributes
Professional
Passionate
Adaptable
Innovate
continuously
Seize new
opportunities
Figure 5.
Entrepreneurial path
330
IJEBR
23,2
Notes
1. These actions have been implemented through the project “STARTENT: Fostering BusinessUniversity Partnerships for Entrepreneurship Education in Europe”, co-funded by the European
Commission, DG Enterprise and Industry under the call “Entrepreneurial culture of young people
and entrepreneurship education”. The overall objective of the project was to contribute to
developing the entrepreneurial culture of young people, and to improve entrepreneurship
education in Europe. Available at: www.startent.eu
2. Complete texts of the replies in the form of “success stories” are published at: www.startent.eu/
publications
3. The complete discussions can be followed at: www.startent.eu LinkedIn discussions.
4. www.residencia.csic.es/en/info/history.htm
5. www.ted.com/talks/ken_robinson_says_schools_kill_creativity.html
References
Adomako, S., Danso, A., Uddin, M. and Ofori-Damoah, J. (2016), “Entrepreneurs’, optimism, cognitive
style and persistence”, International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behavior & Research, Vol. 22
No. 1, pp. 84-108.
Ajzen, I. (1991), “The theory of planned behavior”, Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, Vol. 50 No. 2, pp. 179-211.
Aldrich, H. (2000), “Entrepreneurial strategies in new organizational populations”, in
Swedberg, R. (Ed.), Entrepreneurship: The Social Science View, University Press, Oxford,
pp. 211-228.
Autio, E., Dahlander, L. and Frederiksen, L. (2013), “Information exposure, opportunity evaluation, and
entrepreneurial action: an investigation of an online user community”, Academy of Management
Journal, Vol. 56 No. 5, pp. 1348-1371.
Autio, E., Keeley, R.H., Klofsten, M., Parker, G.G.C. and Hay, M. (2001), “Entrepreneurial intent among
students in Scandinavia and in the USA”, Enterprise and Innovation Management Studies, Vol. 2
No. 2, pp. 145-160.
Babson Insight Staff (2003), “Entrepreneurs: born or made? A conversation with Herb
Kelleher of Southwest Airlines”, available at: http://searchcio.techtarget.com/news/924412/
Entrepreneurs-Born-or-made-A-conversation-with-Herb-Kelleher-of-Southwest-Airlines (accessed
6 February 2012).
Bampton, R. and Cowton, C.J. (2002), “The e-interview (27 paragraphs)”, Forum Qualitative
Sozialforschung Forum: Qualitative Social Research, Vol. 3 No. 2, available at: www.qualitativeresearch.net/fqs-texte/2-02/2-02bamptoncowton-e.htm (accessed 7 September 2016).
Bauernschuster, S., Falck, O. and Heblich, S. (2010), “Social capital access and entrepreneurship”,
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, Vol. 76 No. 3, pp. 821-833.
Blanchflower, D.G., Oswald, A. and Stutzer, A. (2001), “Latent entrepreneurship across nations”,
European Economic Review, Vol. 45 Nos 4/6, pp. 680-691.
Bosma, N., Wennekers, S. and Amorós, J.E. (2012), “Entrepreneurs and entrepreneurial employees
across the globe”, 2011 extended report, Global Entrepreneurship Monitor, available at: www.
babson.edu/Academics/centers/blank-center/global-research/gem/Documents/GEM%202011%
20Extended%20Report%20VF%20rev.pdf (accessed 28 February 2016).
Bridge, S., O’Neill, K. and Martin, F. (2009), Understanding Enterprise: Entrepreneurship and Small
Business, 3rd ed., Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke.
Bryman, A. (2012), Social Research Methods, 4th ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Bryman, A., Becker, S. and Sempik, J. (2008), “Quality criteria for quantitative, qualitative and
mixed methods research: a view from social policy”, Social Research Methodology, Vol. 11 No. 4,
p. 261.
331
Entrepreneurial
path
Checkland, P. (1993), Systems Thinking, Systems Practice, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, New York, NY,
Brisbane and Toronto.
Coomber, R. (1997), “Using the internet for survey research”, Sociological Research Online,
Vol. 2 No. 2, available at: www.socresonline.org.uk/socresonline/2/2/2.html (accessed
7 September 2016).
Cox, K. (2014), “Fundamental entrepreneurial planning processes: resource assessment and
opportunity evaluation”, The International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation,
Vol. 15 No. 2, pp. 79-88.
Dawson, C., Fuller-Love, N., Sinnott, E. and O’Gorman, B. (2011), “Entrepreneurs’ perceptions of
business networks: does gender matter?”, The International Journal of Entrepreneurship and
Innovation, Vol. 12 No. 4, pp. 271-281.
De Clerq, D. and Arenius, P. (2006), “The role of knowledge in business start-up activity”, International
Small Business Journal, Vol. 24 No. 4, pp. 339-358.
Denzin, K.N. and Lincoln, S.Y. (2005), The Sage Handbook of Qualitative Research, 5th ed.,
Sage Publications, CA.
Dewett, T. and Gruys, M. (2007), “Advancing the case for creativity through graduate business
education”, Thinking Skills and Creativity, Vol. 2 No. 2, pp. 85-95.
Dunn, T. and Holtz-Eakin, D. (2000), “Financial capital, human capital, and the transition to
self-employment: evidence from intergenerational links”, Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 18
No. 2, pp. 285-305.
Etzkowitz, H., Webster, A., Gebhardt, C. and Cantisano Terra, B.R. (2000), “The future of the university
and the university of the future: evolution of ivory tower to entrepreneurial paradigm”, Research
Policy, Vol. 29 No. 2, pp. 313-330.
European Commission (2008), “Entrepreneurship in higher education, especially in non-business
studies”, final report, Enterprise and Industry Directorate-General, Brussels.
Fayolle, A., Gailly, B. and Lassas-Clerc, N. (2006), “Assessing the impact of entrepreneurship
education programmes: a new methodology”, Journal of European Industrial Training, Vol. 30
No. 9, pp. 701-720.
Grilo, I. and Irigoyen, J.M. (2006), “Entrepreneurship in the EU: to wish and not to be”, Small Business
Economics, Vol. 24 No. 4, pp. 305-318.
Gurel, E., Altinay, L. and Daniele, R. (2010), “Tourism students’ entrepreneurial intentions”, Annals of
Tourism Research, Vol. 37 No. 3, pp. 646-669.
Gnyawali, D. and Ravindranath, M. (2001), “Cooperative networks and competitive dynamics:
a structural embeddedness perspective”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 26 No. 3,
pp. 431-445.
Hoang, H. and Antoncic, B. (2003), “Network-based research in entrepreneurship: a critical review”,
Journal of Business Venturing, Vol. 18 No. 2, pp. 165-187.
Jonsson, S. (2014), “Entrepreneurs’ network evolution – the relevance of cognitive social
capital”, International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour and Research, Vol. 21 No. 2,
pp. 197-223.
Jung, D.I., Ehrlich, S.B., De Noble, A.E. and Bok Baik, K. (2001), “Entrepreneurial self-efficacy and its
relationship to entrepreneurial action: a comparative study between the US and Korea”,
Management International, Vol. 6 No. 1, pp. 41-53.
Klyver, K., Hunter, E. and Watne, T. (2012), “Entrepreneurial ties and innovativeness in the
start-up decision”, The International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation, Vol. 13 No. 3,
pp. 153-163.
Kohn, K., Ulrich, K. and Spengler, H. (2010), “Annual analysis of structure and dynamic
of entrepreneurship in Germany”, Frankfurt Main Entrepreneurship Education, Vol. 1 No. 1,
pp. 65-86.
332
IJEBR
23,2
Kuratko, D.F. (2005), “The emergence of entrepreneurship education: development, trends, and
challenges”, Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice, Vol. 29 No. 5, pp. 577-597.
Lamine, W., Mian, S. and Fayolle, A. (2014), “How do social skills enable nascent entrepreneurs
to enact perseverance strategies in the face of challenges? A comparative case study of success
and failure”, International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour and Research, Vol. 20 No. 6,
pp. 517-541.
Lans, T., Gulikers, J. and Batterink, M. (2010), “Moving beyond traditional measures of entrepreneurial
intentions in a study among life-sciences students in the Netherlands”, Research in PostCompulsory Education, Vol. 15 No. 3, pp. 259-274.
Liñán, F. and Chen, Y.W. (2009), “Development and cross-cultural application of a specific instrument
to measure entrepreneurial intentions”, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, Vol. 3 No. 3,
pp. 593-617.
Markman, G.D. and Baron, R.A. (2003), “Person-entrepreneurship fit: why some people are more
successful as entrepreneurs than others”, Human Resource Management Review, Vol. 13 No. 2,
p. 281.
Matlay, H. (2008), “The impact of entrepreneurship education on entrepreneurial outcomes”, Journal of
Small Business and Enterprise Development, Vol. 15 No. 2, pp. 382-396.
Oosterbeek, H., Van Praag, M. and Ijsselstein, A. (2010), “The impact of entrepreneurship
education on entrepreneurship skills and motivation”, European Economic Review, Vol. 54 No. 3,
pp. 442-454.
Opdenakker, R. (2006), “Advantages and disadvantages of four interview techniques in qualitative
research, Paragraph 14 (44 paragraphs)”, Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung/Forum: Qualitative
Social Research, Vol. 7 No. 4, available at: http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:0114-fqs0604118
Pellinen, K. (2014), “The interplay of entrepreneurial and network activities in the entrepreneurial
process: a relational analysis”, The International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation,
Vol. 15 No. 1, pp. 17-28.
Pidd, M. (1996), Tools for Thinking. Modeling in Management Science, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester;
New York, NY, Brisbane, Toronto and Singapore.
Prá Martens, C.D., Fabrício Martins, L., Ana Claudia, B. and Rodrigues de Freitas, H.M. (2016),
“Research on entrepreneurial orientation: current status and future agenda”, International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Behavior & Research, Vol. 22 No. 4, pp. 556-583.
Pruett, M., Shinnar, R., Toney, B., Llopis, F. and Fox, J. (2009), “Explaining entrepreneurial intentions of
university students: a cross-cultural study”, International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour
& Research, Vol. 15 No. 6, pp. 571-594.
Renzulli, L.A., Aldrich, H. and Moody, J. (2000), “Family matters: gender, networks, and entrepreneurial
outcomes”, Social Forces, Vol. 79 No. 2, pp. 523-546.
Rasmussen, E.A. and Sørheim, R. (2006), “Action-based entrepreneurship education”, Technovation,
Vol. 26 No. 2, pp. 185-194.
Robinson, K. (2001), Out of Our Minds: Learning to be Creative, Wiley: Capstone, Chichester.
Robinson, K. (2009), The Element: How Finding Your Passion Changes Everything, Penguin, London.
Scholin, T., Broome, P. and Ohlsson, H. (2016), “Self-employment: the significance of families for
professional intentions and choice of company type”, International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Behaviour and Research, Vol. 22 No. 3, pp. 329-345.
Segal, G., Borgia, D. and Schoenfeld, J. (2005), “The motivation to become an entrepreneur”,
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour and Research, Vol. 11 No. 1, pp. 42-57.
Shapero, A. (1982), “Social dimensions of entrepreneurship”, in Kent, C. et al. (Eds), The Encyclopedia of
Entrepreneurship, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, pp. 72-90.
Shinnar, R.S., Giacomin, O. and Janssen, F. (2012), “Entrepreneurial perceptions and intentions:
the role of gender and culture”, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, Vol. 36 No. 3,
pp. 465-493.
333
Entrepreneurial
path
Souitaris, V., Zerbinati, S. and Al-Laham, A. (2007), “Do entrepreneurship programmes raise
entrepreneurial intention of science and engineering students? The effect of learning, inspiration
and resources”, Journal of Business Venturing, Vol. 22 No. 4, pp. 566-591.
Stoltz, P.G. (2000), Adversity Quotient at Work, HarperCollins Publishers, New York, NY.
Teece, D.J., et al. (1997), “Dynamic capabilities and strategic management”, Strategic Management
Journal, Vol. 18 No. 7, pp. 509-533.
Ulhøi, J.P. (2005), “The social dimensions of entrepreneurship”, Technovation, Vol. 25 No. 8,
pp. 939-946.
Verheul, I., Thurik, R., Grilo, I. and van der Zwan, P. (2011), “Explaining preferences and actual
involvement in self-employment: gender and the entrepreneurial personality”, Journal of
Economic Psychology, Vol. 33 No. 2, pp. 325-341.
Wadhwa, V., Raj, A., Krisztina, H. and Alex, S. (2009), “The anatomy of an entrepreneur: family,
background and motivation”, available at: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=
1431263 (accessed 28 February 2016).
Welter, F. and Smallbone, D. (2006), “Exploring the role of trust in entrepreneurial activity”,
Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice, Vol. 30 No. 4, pp. 465-475.
Zampetakis, L., Gotsi, M., Andriopoulos, C. and Moustakis, V. (2011), “Creativity and entrepreneurial
intention in young people”, The International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation,
Vol. 12 No. 3, pp. 189-199.
Further reading
Druihe, C. and Garnsey, E. (2002), “Tracking the emergence and progress of university spin-out cases”,
IEEE International Engineering Management Conference, (IEMC ’02), Cambridge, 18-20 August,
pp. 322-327.
Hajizadeh, A. and Zali, R.Z. (2016), “Prior knowledge, cognitive characteristics and opportunity
recognition”, International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behavior & Research, Vol. 22 No. 1,
pp. 63-83.
Honig, B. (2004), “Entrepreneurship education: toward a model of contingency-based business
planning”, Academy of Management Learning and Education, Vol. 3 No. 3, pp. 258-273.
Liñán, F. (2004), “Intention-based models of entrepreneurship education”, Piccolla Impresa/Small
Business, Vol. 3 No. 1, pp. 11-35.
Maman, D. (2000), “Who accumulates directorships of big business firms in Israel?:
Organizational structure, social capital and human capital”, Human Relations, Vol. 53 No. 5,
pp. 603-630.
OECD (2009), The Impact of The Global Crisis on SMEs and Entrepreneurship Financing and Policy
Responses, C.f.e. OECD, SMEs and Local Development, Paris.
Weitzel, U., Urbig, D., Desai, S., Sanders, M. and Acs, Z. (2010), “The good, the bad, and the talented:
entrepreneurial talent and selfish behavior”, Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization,
Vol. 76 No. 1, pp. 64-81.
334
IJEBR
23,2
Appendix
Corresponding author
Paraskevi Giourka can be contacted at: pgiourka@gmail.com
Age group Level of educationa Gender group
18-24 9 Grad/post degree 30 Male 36
25-30 19 PhD 6 Female 17
31-35 16 Vocational 2
35+ 9
Note: a
15 participants did not provide data
Table AI.
Young entrepreneurs’
profile
Country of origin Type of activity Years of operation
Spain 15 IT services 13 1st year 14
UK 8 Consulting 12 up to 3 years 22
Bulgaria 7 Creative industry 7 up to 5 years 10
Italy 7 Energy 5 5+ years 7
Portugal 5 Health/cosmetic services 4
Cyprus 4 Othera 12
Otherb 7
Notes: a
Agro-food, clothes, architecture, biomedical, construction, copy centre, education, law, trade,
water treatment; b
Belgium, Hungary, Finland, France, Germany, USA
Table AII.
Young entrepreneurs’
origin, type of
activity, years
of operation
For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
335
Entrepreneurial
path